Add variant (#2305)
huggingface/diffusers: docs/source/en/using-diffusers/loading.mdx

## Loading pipelines

> The [`DiffusionPipeline`] class is the easiest way to access any diffusion model that is [available on the Hub](https://huggingface.co/models?library=diffusers). Let's look at an example on how to download [CompVis' Latent Diffusion model](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/ldm-text2im-large-256).

Author: Update the example here to use Stable Diffusion as the main example instead of LDM. We used LDM back then because of gated access but it's no longer the case.

Reviewer: Makes total sense!

The pipeline instance can then be called using [`StableDiffusionPipeline.__call__`] (i.e., `pipe("image of a astronaut riding a horse")`) for text-to-image generation.

Instead of using the generic [`DiffusionPipeline`] class for loading, you can also load the appropriate pipeline class directly. The code snippet above yields the same instance as when doing:

```python
from diffusers import StableDiffusionPipeline

repo_id = "runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5"
pipe = StableDiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained(repo_id)
```

<Tip>

Many checkpoints, such as [CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4) and [runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5](https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5) can be used for multiple tasks, *e.g.* *text-to-image* or *image-to-image*.
If you want to use those checkpoints for a task that is different from the default one, you have to load it directly from the corresponding task-specific pipeline class:

```python
from diffusers import StableDiffusionImg2ImgPipeline

repo_id = "runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5"
pipe = StableDiffusionImg2ImgPipeline.from_pretrained(repo_id)
```

</Tip>

> Diffusion pipelines like `StableDiffusionImg2ImgPipeline` consist of multiple components. These components can be both parameterized models, such as `"unet"`, `"vae"` and "text_encoder", tokenizers or schedulers. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Diffusion pipelines like `StableDiffusionPipeline` or `StableDiffusionImg2ImgPipeline` consist of multiple components. These components can be both parameterized models, such as `"unet"`, `"vae"` and "text_encoder", tokenizers or schedulers. 
```

(Adding the common `StableDiffusionPipeline` so new users don't think this is something peculiar about the img-2-img pipeline)

These components often interact in complex ways with each other when using the pipeline in inference, *e.g.* for [`StableDiffusionPipeline`] the inference call is explained [here](https://huggingface.co/blog/stable_diffusion#how-does-stable-diffusion-work).
The purpose of the [pipeline classes](./api/overview#diffusers-summary) is to wrap the complexity of these diffusion systems and give the user an easy-to-use API while staying flexible for customization, as will be shown later.

> <!---

Author: Not needed at the moment since all models are freely accessible

Note how the above code snippet makes use of [`DiffusionPipeline.components`].

### Loading variants

Diffusion Pipeline checkpoints can offer variants of the "main" diffusion pipeline checkpoint.
Such checkpoint variants are usually variations of the checkpoint that have advantages for specific use-cases and that are so similar to the "main" checkpoint that they **should not** be put in a new checkpoint. A variation of a checkpoint has to have **exactly** the same checkpoint layout including all weights having the same tensor shapes.

#### Let's first talk about what checkpoint variants are **not**.

> Checkpoint variants do **not** include different serialization format (such as [safetensors](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/using-diffusers/using_safetensors)) as different serialization formats are 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Checkpoint variants do **not** include different serialization formats (such as [safetensors](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/using-diffusers/using_safetensors)) as different serialization formats are 
```

identical to the "main" serialization format, just loaded with different code.

Also variants do not correspond to different checkpoint layouts, *e.g.* [stable-diffusion-v1-5](https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5) is not a variant of [stable-diffusion-2-0](https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2) since the checkpoint layout is different (Stable Diffusion 1-5 uses a different `CLIPTextModel` compared to Stable Diffusion 2.0).

> Pipeline checkpoints that are identical in checkpoint layout, but have been trained on different datasets, trained with vastly diffenent training setups and thus correspond to different official releases (such as [Stable Diffusion v1-4](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4) and [Stable Diffusion v1-5](https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5)) should probably also not be stored as variations of each other, but rather as individual model repositories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pipeline checkpoints that are identical in checkpoint layout, but have been trained on different datasets, trained with vastly different training setups and thus correspond to different official releases (such as [Stable Diffusion v1-4](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4) and [Stable Diffusion v1-5](https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5)) should probably also not be stored as variations of each other, but rather as individual model repositories.
```

#### So what are checkpoint variants then? 

> Checkpoint variants usually consists of the checkpoint stored in "*low-precision, low-storage*" dtype so that less bandwith is required to download them or of *non-exponential-averaged* weights that shall be used when continuing fine-tuning the checkpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Checkpoint variants usually consist of the checkpoint stored in "*low-precision, low-storage*" dtype so that less bandwith is required to download them, or of *non-exponential-averaged* weights that shall be used when continuing fine-tuning from the checkpoint.
```

> Both such use case have clear advantages in certain settings, have the same serialization format, and correspond to an adaption of the "main" checkpoint which does not warrant a new model repository. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both use cases have clear advantages when their weights are considered variants: they share the same serialization format as the reference weights, and they correspond to an specialization of the "main" checkpoint which does not warrant a new model repository. 
```

A checkpoint stored in [torch's half-precision / float16 format](https://pytorch.org/blog/accelerating-training-on-nvidia-gpus-with-pytorch-automatic-mixed-precision/) requires only half the bandwith and storage when downloading the checkpoint,

> **but** cannot be used when continuing training the checkpoint or when running the checkpoint on CPU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**but** cannot be used when continuing training or when running the checkpoint on CPU.
```

> Similarly the *non-exponential-averaged* version of the checkpoint should be used when continuing fine-tuning of the model checkpoint, **but** should not be used when using the checkpoint for inference. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly the *non-exponential-averaged* (or non-EMA) version of the checkpoint should be used when continuing fine-tuning of the model checkpoint, **but** should not be used when using the checkpoint for inference. 
```

#### How to save and load variants

Saving a diffusion pipeline as a variant can be done by providing [`DiffusionPipeline.save_pretrained`] with the `variant` argument. 
The `variant` extends the weight name by the provided variation, by changing the default weight name from `diffusion_pytorch_model.bin` to `diffusion_pytorch_model.{variant}.bin` or from `diffusion_pytorch_model.safetensors` to `diffusion_pytorch_model.{variant}.safetensors`. By doing so, one creates a variant of the pipeline checkpoint that can be loaded **instead** of the "main" pipeline checkpoint.

Let's have a look at how we could create a float16 variant of a pipeline. First, we load 

> the "main" variant of a checkpoint into mixed precision format, using `dtype=torch.float16`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the "main" variant of a checkpoint (stored in `float32` precision) into mixed precision format, using `dtype=torch.float16`.
```

```py
from diffusers import DiffusionPipeline
import torch

pipe = DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5", dtype=torch.float16)
```

Now all model components of the pipeline are stored in half-precision dtype. We can now save the 

> pipeline under a `"fp16"` variant as follows:

Reviewer: Not sure if we should standardize / recommend `fp16` (that's the name of the old revision branch), or `float16` (the torch type).

Author: Good question! Think it'll be difficult to nudge the community towards float16 given that we advertised `="fp16"` everywhere - also in terms of deprecating it'll be difficult

Reviewer 2: +1 I think we've stadardized on fp16

I think if we also want to have sets of equivalent variations that's cool too.

i.e. if the user passes "float16" as the variant, we use fp16 anyway and log letting them know

```py
pipe.save_pretrained("./stable-diffusion-v1-5", variant="fp16")
```

> 

Reviewer: If you check the size of the output directory you'll notice that the weights take half the space as their counterparts in the Hub, as they were converted from `float32` to `float16`. You'll also see that the variant was added to the filenames so both versions can coexist in the same repo.

### How does loading work?

As a class method, [`DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained`] is responsible for two things:
- Download the latest version of the folder structure required to run the `repo_id` with `diffusers` and cache them. If the latest folder structure is available in the local cache, [`DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained`] will simply reuse the cache and **not** re-download the files.
- Load the cached weights into the _correct_ pipeline class – one of the [officially supported pipeline classes](./api/overview#diffusers-summary) - and return an instance of the class. The _correct_ pipeline class is thereby retrieved from the `model_index.json` file.

The underlying folder structure of diffusion pipelines correspond 1-to-1 to their corresponding class instances, *e.g.* [`StableDiffusionPipeline`] for [`runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5`](https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5)

> This can be understood better by looking at an example. Let's print out pipeline class instance `pipeline` we just defined:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be better understood by looking at an example. Let's load a pipeline class instance `pipe` and print it:
```

```python
from diffusers import DiffusionPipeline

repo_id = "runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5"
pipe = DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained(repo_id)
print(pipe)
```

*Output*:
```
StableDiffusionPipeline {
  "feature_extractor": [
    "transformers",
    "CLIPFeatureExtractor"
  ],
  "safety_checker": [
    "stable_diffusion",
    "StableDiffusionSafetyChecker"
  ],
  "scheduler": [
    "diffusers",
    "PNDMScheduler"
  ],
  "text_encoder": [
    "transformers",
    "CLIPTextModel"
  ],
  "tokenizer": [
    "transformers",
    "CLIPTokenizer"
  ],
  "unet": [
    "diffusers",
    "UNet2DConditionModel"
  ],
  "vae": [
    "diffusers",
    "AutoencoderKL"
  ]
}
```

First, we see that the official pipeline is the [`StableDiffusionPipeline`], and second we see that the `StableDiffusionPipeline` consists of 7 components:

> - `"feature_extractor"` of class `CLIPFeatureExtractor` as defined [in `transformes`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/model_doc/clip#transformers.CLIPFeatureExtractor).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `"feature_extractor"` of class `CLIPFeatureExtractor` as defined [in `transformers`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/model_doc/clip#transformers.CLIPFeatureExtractor).
```

- `"safety_checker"` as defined [here](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/e55687e1e15407f60f32242027b7bb8170e58266/src/diffusers/pipelines/stable_diffusion/safety_checker.py#L32).
- `"scheduler"` of class [`PNDMScheduler`].

> - `"text_encoder"` of class `CLIPTextModel` as defined [in `transformes`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/model_doc/clip#transformers.CLIPTextModel).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `"text_encoder"` of class `CLIPTextModel` as defined [in `transformers`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/model_doc/clip#transformers.CLIPTextModel).
```

Note how the above code snippet makes use of [`DiffusionPipeline.components`].

### Loading variants

Diffusion Pipeline checkpoints can offer variants of the "main" diffusion pipeline checkpoint.

> Such checkpoint variants are usually variations of the checkpoint that have advantages for specific use-cases and that are so similar to the "main" checkpoint that they **should not** be put in a new checkpoint. A variation of a checkpoint has to have **exactly** the same checkpoint layout including all weights having the same tensor shapes.

Reviewer 3: A variation of a checkpoint has to have **exactly** the same serialization format and **exactly** the same checkpoint layout, including all weights having the same tensor shapes.

Author: BTW @yiyixuxu feel free to leave suggestions to correct directly in line: https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/reviewing-changes-in-pull-requests/commenting-on-a-pull-request

> Diffusion Pipeline checkpoints can offer variants of the "main" diffusion pipeline checkpoint.
> Such checkpoint variants are usually variations of the checkpoint that have advantages for specific use-cases and that are so similar to the "main" checkpoint that they **should not** be put in a new checkpoint. A variation of a checkpoint has to have **exactly** the same checkpoint layout including all weights having the same tensor shapes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Diffusion Pipeline checkpoints can offer variants of the "main" diffusion pipeline checkpoint.
Such checkpoint variants are usually variations of the checkpoint that have advantages for specific use-cases and that are so similar to the "main" checkpoint that they **should not** be put in a new checkpoint. A variation of a checkpoint has to have **exactly** the same checkpoint layout including all weights having the same tensor shapes.

Examples of variations are different floating point types and non-ema weights i.e. "fp16 and bf16" are common variants. I.e. "fp16", "bf16", and "no_ema" are common variations.
```

> Such checkpoint variants are usually variations of the checkpoint that have advantages for specific use-cases and that are so similar to the "main" checkpoint that they **should not** be put in a new checkpoint. A variation of a checkpoint has to have **exactly** the same checkpoint layout including all weights having the same tensor shapes.

Author: ```suggestion
Such checkpoint variants are usually variations of the checkpoint that have advantages for specific use-cases and that are so similar to the "main" checkpoint that they **should not** be put in a new checkpoint.
A variation of a checkpoint has to have **exactly** the same serialization format and **exactly** the same checkpoint layout, including all weights having the same tensor shapes.
```

> Such checkpoint variants are usually variations of the checkpoint that have advantages for specific use-cases and that are so similar to the "main" checkpoint that they **should not** be put in a new checkpoint. A variation of a checkpoint has to have **exactly** the same checkpoint layout including all weights having the same tensor shapes.

Author: ```suggestion
Such checkpoint variants are usually variations of the checkpoint that have advantages for specific use-cases and that are so similar to the "main" checkpoint that they **should not** be put in a new checkpoint. A variation of a checkpoint has to have **exactly** the same checkpoint layout including all weights having the same tensor shapes.

Examples of variations are different floating point types and non-ema weights. I.e. "fp16", "bf16", and "no_ema" are common variations.
```

#### Let's first talk about what checkpoint variants are **not**.

Checkpoint variants do **not** include different serialization formats (such as [safetensors](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/using-diffusers/using_safetensors)) as different serialization formats are 

> identical to the "main" serialization format, just loaded with different code.

Reviewer 2: wdym "different code"?

> Also variants do not correspond to different checkpoint layouts, *e.g.* [stable-diffusion-v1-5](https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5) is not a variant of [stable-diffusion-2-0](https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2) since the checkpoint layout is different (Stable Diffusion 1-5 uses a different `CLIPTextModel` compared to Stable Diffusion 2.0).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Also variants do not correspond to different model structures, *e.g.* [stable-diffusion-v1-5](https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5) is not a variant of [stable-diffusion-2-0](https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2) since the model structure is different (Stable Diffusion 1-5 uses a different `CLIPTextModel` compared to Stable Diffusion 2.0).
```

I think "model structure" is a bit clearer than "checkpoint layout", wdyt?

> Pipeline checkpoints that are identical in checkpoint layout, but have been trained on different datasets, trained with vastly different training setups and thus correspond to different official releases (such as [Stable Diffusion v1-4](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4) and [Stable Diffusion v1-5](https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5)) should probably also not be stored as variations of each other, but rather as individual model repositories.

Reviewer 3: what's an example of two checkpoints that have been trained on a slightly different dataset with a slightly different training process that should be stored as variations of each other?

Author: E.g. see how this checkpoint: https://huggingface.co/Gazoche/sd-gundam-diffusers/tree/main has multiple branches depending on the number of training steps - I'd probably put those as variants instead

> Pipeline checkpoints that are identical in checkpoint layout, but have been trained on different datasets, trained with vastly different training setups and thus correspond to different official releases (such as [Stable Diffusion v1-4](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4) and [Stable Diffusion v1-5](https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5)) should probably also not be stored as variations of each other, but rather as individual model repositories.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pipeline checkpoints that are identical in checkpoint layout, but have been trained on different datasets, trained with vastly different training setups and thus correspond to different official releases (such as [Stable Diffusion v1-4](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4) and [Stable Diffusion v1-5](https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5)) should probably be stored in individual repositories instead of as variations of eachother.
```

**but** cannot be used when continuing training or when running the checkpoint on CPU.
Similarly the *non-exponential-averaged* (or non-EMA) version of the checkpoint should be used when continuing fine-tuning of the model checkpoint, **but** should not be used when using the checkpoint for inference. 

#### How to save and load variants

Saving a diffusion pipeline as a variant can be done by providing [`DiffusionPipeline.save_pretrained`] with the `variant` argument. 
The `variant` extends the weight name by the provided variation, by changing the default weight name from `diffusion_pytorch_model.bin` to `diffusion_pytorch_model.{variant}.bin` or from `diffusion_pytorch_model.safetensors` to `diffusion_pytorch_model.{variant}.safetensors`. By doing so, one creates a variant of the pipeline checkpoint that can be loaded **instead** of the "main" pipeline checkpoint.

Let's have a look at how we could create a float16 variant of a pipeline. First, we load 
the "main" variant of a checkpoint (stored in `float32` precision) into mixed precision format, using `dtype=torch.float16`.

```py
from diffusers import DiffusionPipeline
import torch

> pipe = DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5", dtype=torch.float16)

Reviewer 3: it should be `torch_dtype` ?

```

Now all model components of the pipeline are stored in half-precision dtype. We can now save the 
pipeline under a `"fp16"` variant as follows:

```py
pipe.save_pretrained("./stable-diffusion-v1-5", variant="fp16")
```

> If we don't save into an existing `stable-diffusion-v1-5` folder the new folder would look as follows:

Reviewer 3: Is this what you meant? 
```suggestion
If we save into an existing `stable-diffusion-v1-5` folder the new folder would look as follows:
```

```
stable-diffusion-v1-5
├── feature_extractor
│   └── preprocessor_config.json
├── model_index.json
├── safety_checker
│   ├── config.json
│   └── pytorch_model.fp16.bin
├── scheduler
│   └── scheduler_config.json
├── text_encoder
│   ├── config.json
│   └── pytorch_model.fp16.bin
├── tokenizer
│   ├── merges.txt
│   ├── special_tokens_map.json
│   ├── tokenizer_config.json
│   └── vocab.json
├── unet
│   ├── config.json
│   └── diffusion_pytorch_model.fp16.bin
└── vae
    ├── config.json
    └── diffusion_pytorch_model.fp16.bin
```

As one can see, all model files now have a `.fp16.bin` extension instead of just `.bin`.
The variant now has to be loaded by also passing a `variant="fp16"` to [`DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained`], e.g.:

```py

> DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("./stable-diffusion-v1-5", variant="fp16", dtype=torch.float16)

Reviewer 2: As a user, I think I would be a bit surprised if I loaded the fp16 variant and had to also explicitly pass the fp16 dtype, wdyt?

Author: ```suggestion
DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("./stable-diffusion-v1-5", variant="fp16", torch_dtype=torch.float16)
```

Author: Yeah that's a bigger topic though https://discuss.pytorch.org/t/discrepancy-between-loading-models-with-meta-tensors-and-normal-load-from-state-dict/168295

```

works just fine, while:

```py
DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("./stable-diffusion-v1-5", dtype=torch.float16)
```

throws an Exception:
```

> OSError: Error no file named diffusion_pytorch_model.bin found in directory ./stable-diffusion-v1-45/vae since we **only** stored the model 

Reviewer 2: We should throw a better error here, something like

"Error: You loaded the pipeline without a variant. Only found variants: `fp16`, `bf16` in the repository."

And similarly, when loading with a variant that isn't present.

"Error: You loaded the pipeline with variant: `fp16`. Only found variants: `bf16`, `no_ema` in the repository."

We could do this as a follow up PR?

```

and upload the pipeline to the Hub under [diffusers/stable-diffusion-variants](https://huggingface.co/diffusers/stable-diffusion-variants).
The file structure [on the Hub](https://huggingface.co/diffusers/stable-diffusion-variants/tree/main) now looks as follows:

```
├── feature_extractor
│   └── preprocessor_config.json
├── model_index.json
├── safety_checker
│   ├── config.json
│   ├── pytorch_model.bin
│   └── pytorch_model.fp16.bin
├── scheduler
│   └── scheduler_config.json
├── text_encoder
│   ├── config.json
│   ├── pytorch_model.bin
│   └── pytorch_model.fp16.bin
├── tokenizer
│   ├── merges.txt
│   ├── special_tokens_map.json
│   ├── tokenizer_config.json
│   └── vocab.json
├── unet
│   ├── config.json
│   ├── diffusion_pytorch_model.bin
│   ├── diffusion_pytorch_model.fp16.bin
└── vae
    ├── config.json
    ├── diffusion_pytorch_model.bin
    └── diffusion_pytorch_model.fp16.bin
```

We can now both download the "main" and the "fp16" variant from the Hub. Both:

```py
pipe = DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("diffusers/stable-diffusion-variants")
```

and 

```py
pipe = DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("diffusers/stable-diffusion-variants", variant="fp16")

> ```

Reviewer 2: Yeah +1 these are really great docs
